My customer wants me to break down my
bid. Should I? We'll answer that
question right now on Successful
Contractor. A lot of people that are new
to contracting often wonder if they
should be breaking their bids down. And
when I say breaking a bid down, should
they be providing one lump sum proposal
and saying, "Here, here's a turnkey
project, or should I be listing out
materials, labor, markup, whatever else
you want to do?" And I'd like to share
my take on all that based on my 30 years
of contracting experience. I'll tell you
how we do it and some of the pitfalls if
you do decide to break a bid down that
you can fall into with your customers
that maybe irritate them. So, the way we
do bids here at S SWI is we do lumpsum
and lumpsum only. I will not break
anything down. And this isn't to deceive
anybody. This isn't to hurt anybody.
Basically, all we're trying to do is
keep it simple so that they can wrap
their head around it because not
everybody understands all of the costs
associated with doing a project. when
they see a lump sum price, they know
that my fence is going to cost me
$5,000. They can either mentally say
that's okay, or they can say, "That's
too high. I want to get some more bids."
But it makes it really easy and simple
for them to compare, especially if I've
given them a good description of the
work that I'm going to do for them. I've
told Mrs. Johnson that we're going to do
200 ft of aluminum fence and it's going
to cost her $5,000 and for that she's
going to get a couple of gates as well.
Makes it super easy. We have a diagram.
We basically spelled it out. she has no
questions about what we're going to do
for. Now, what we have seen in the past
is we've seen customers come back and
say, "That's great. I like the price,
but could you please break this down for
me?" And I'll tell you where I think
that's typically headed. One of two
different places. The first reason that
somebody might do that is the more
innocent of the two. Maybe they got the
bid from you and it's just too expensive
and they could be wondering how they can
save some money. Maybe they were looking
to spend $3,000 and you handed them a
bid for five. They might be looking for
ways to cut the cost and get it within
their budget. Rather than immediately
giving them a cost breakdown, the
question I would ask is, "What has
caused you to request this bid
breakdown? What are you trying to gain
by doing so?" And you'll get a better
understanding and very quickly
understand what they're trying to do.
So, if they say, "Well, it just came in
a lot higher than I wanted it to, and I
was trying to look for some ways to save
money." That gives you an opportunity to
say, "Okay, well, we could maybe do
this, this, and this that would impact
your bid favorably to your budget." The
second scenario is what we've run into a
ton of times and that is people that
want us to break down. They want to see
how many labor hours we have. They want
to see all the materials that we have.
And this can go many different ways. So
when it comes to materials, they could
be looking at, okay, well, if he can
tell me how much the materials are, and
especially if I can get him to give me a
list, I'll just go down to the local big
box store. I'll pick up all the stuff
and then I'll expect him to still do the
job for what his labor cost is. Well, it
doesn't quite work like that because a
lot of people don't understand that we
have markup on materials and that helps
us cover all the overhead. Not to
mention, we've got to go to Lowe's or
Home Depot and we've got to pick all
that stuff up. There's a lot of costs
associated with handling that material,
planning all that stuff that people
don't understand. And if I don't get it
from the material, typically going to
have to raise my labor rate to recover
those same amount of costs. My costs
don't change. My cost of doing business
every day don't change just because now
I didn't have to go get the material or
because the customer provided the
material. In our company, we have a
policy. We just don't use owner provided
material. We don't. And if there is a
case where we did ever do that, I would
have a higher labor rate to cover that
owner provided material cuz what usually
happens is they're going to be missing
things. It's going to be wrong and
you're going to have to go chase it down
or you're going to have to wait for them
to chase it down. So, it just opens up a
whole host of problems including you not
being as profitable on the job, which
that's not acceptable. That's not how we
become successful contractors. The other
thing I've seen happen, and we've had
this happen, and this is how we've
gotten to the place where we are today,
is they say, "Well, I need a bid
breakdown showing me what you're using
and all your stuff." And so it gets to
the end of the job, and we handed them a
bid. And they say, "You know what? You
had 21 posts, but I only see 20 out
here. I need a credit." Okay, that that
that happens. That's what people do.
They don't understand the difference
between a bid and an estimate. At the
top of all of our sheets that we hand
into our customers, it says bid. Now, a
bid is a firm fixed price for doing a
certain scope of work. That means that
it will not go up and it will not go
down unless there's a change order. So,
if I bid 50 posts on your job that only
takes 35 uh and somehow I can figure out
how to get it done appropriately, and
that's a terrible example, but if I can
get it done without cutting corners and
do the scope of work that I've promised
you using less material or um maybe we
bid some extra because we weren't sure
how we were going to lay some stuff out,
you don't always get a full full section
or full 8 ft out of a 2x4. Our sections
might only be spaced 7 and 1/2 ft. So,
we have a certain amount of waste. So,
we kind of build that into the project
knowing that we're going to have waste
or we're going to have coal boards or
coal pickets. And so, they don't
understand that and they go out there
and they count everything and they're
like, "Well, you owe me a credit because
you didn't use 200 pickets. You only
used 176 and now I need a credit." So,
that's one thing that we've seen where
customers will actually go through and
look at that at the end of the job and
expect a credit. They really don't
understand that there's a huge
difference between a bid and an
estimate. And we only do bids. It's all
we do. That means at the end of the job,
if we went out there and we fought it
the whole time and maybe there was some
unforeseen variables that we didn't know
about, we eat it. On the same hand, if
we go out on that same job and it went
way better than we anticipated, maybe we
thought it was going to be super rocky
and it was nothing but butter and we get
it done in 20 hours instead of 30, guess
what? You're not getting a credit.
That's the agreement we had. We had
agreement for a firm fixed price to do
the scope of work regardless of how good
or bad the project went. Now, an
estimate on the other hand is what you
get at the auto dealers. When you go and
you get your car fixed, they say, "It's
going to be about this." But then if
they get in there and they find out
there's other things or if it took them
longer, they're going to charge you for
it. It's just an estimate. It means,
"Hey, we think it's going to cost about
this, but good luck." We don't do that
to our customers. But on the same hand,
when things go extremely well, we don't
give credits either. We take it on both
sides. Whether you break out materials
and labor, one thing I would definitely
suggest you not do is break out your
labor. So we have labor at a firm fixed
price for the entire project. If we have
bid 30 hours and we only get it we get
it done in 20. We keep the extra labor
to ourselves. That's a bonus for us for
being extremely efficient and the
customer got a job done even faster than
what we'd hoped. So they should be happy
and it didn't cost them any more than we
agreed upon. Another reason to be happy.
And on the flip side, if it goes really
bad, they didn't get a bill for more.
What happens in the labor situation is
very much like the material side of
things. Let's say you bid it for 30
hours and you write down 30 hours on the
bid and then they I've seen customers
actually try and track how many hours
you on the job. Well, you were only on
my job for 20 hours. They didn't see the
time that you spent at the shop loading
up or pulling materials to get ready for
their job or if you did have to go pick
stuff up from the lumber yard, they
didn't see all that time. They're only
going to track the stuff that's actually
on their job and then try and ask you
for a credit at the end of it. I would
definitely say that's never a good idea
to do. Lastly, one of the things that
we've found is if we break down labor
and we tell them it's u you know, let's
say arbitrarily our labor rate is $50 an
hour and we tell them it's 40 hours at
$50 an hour. We've actually had a lot of
push back. People don't think we're
worth it. And I don't know what trade
you might be coming to us from, but
people seem to think that we aren't
worth our money. I can give bids out all
day long and tell people that it'll be
$10,000 for their fence and they're
like, "Okay, that's great. I love it."
And some people think that's too
expensive and that's no big deal. But
you know how many people would freak out
and have freaked out when they see how
much we think we're worth? And it's
because we don't think we're worth that.
We know we're worth that. We get that
every day all day. For some reason
though, people just don't want to pay
contractors like us what we're worth.
They don't understand the costs that go
into it. They'll go pay the auto
mechanic down the road where you
actually have to bring all your stuff to
them. They'll pay them a good rate. you
know, they're worth 125 bucks an hour,
but a fence builder that has to train
for this stuff, has to work out in the
elements, not in a nice shop, and that
we actually come to you with our, you
know, sometimes $100,000 worth of
equipment for your job, for some reason,
we're not worth the same as a mechanic.
We're not worth the same as an
electrician. In our field, what we found
is we found a lot of push back because
people just think we're not worth it.
And so, we've eliminated that alto
together. We don't tell them how much
our labor rate is. Um, it doesn't matter
cuz it's a bid and you can either take
it or leave it. So today, if somebody
asked me to break out material and labor
and give them an itemized breakdown of
their project, my answer is $5,000 to do
the job, it's $0 not to. That's your
breakdown. We have in certain
circumstances with federal projects
needed to disclose some cost and after
the contract signed and everything, if
they want to see some of that stuff,
that's fine. But this is a bid. They
need to understand. Again, I think a lot
of customers don't understand the
difference between a bid and an
estimate. The other thing I've done in a
case where somebody says, "Hey, could
you break this out for me?" I said,
"Okay, so do you want to work time and
material on this job?" And that means
that every single nutbolt piece of
material that I bring into this job, I
build them for. And maybe I only charge
them 10% markup, whatever it is. We have
that agreement up front, but every
single hour I put into the project, I
also build them. And that's how we do
all of our repair work for gate
operators and stuff. So our gate
operator people understand that, but our
fence people probably don't. When I tell
them like that, you know, if this thing
takes 50 hours and we only bid 40 in our
estimate, cuz at that point in time,
it's an estimate, then you'll be
responsible for that additional money,
and then they're like, "Okay, no, I I
want to work on a bid. I I just want to
know." Homeowners really appreciate that
firm fixed price. So, I feel like a lot
of times they're trying to get the best
of both worlds. They're trying to hold
you to a firm fixed price because no
customer is ever going to come to you if
they go out and they count up all the
material and all of a sudden now there's
25 post and you only bid 22. They're
never be like, "Oh, I owe you some extra
money." It's always the other way. So,
they only ever It only ever hurts you.
Never ever benefits you. I can assure
you of that. That's just the way it
works. So, that's my take on whether or
not you should be breaking down your
materials and labor. I'll say one last
thing, though. There might be that crowd
out there that says, you know what,
that's just not dishonest. You're just
you're you're screwing people over.
You're just too expensive or whatever
the objections may be. Understand?
Again, this is a firm fixed price. I
provided them with a proposal. They
looked at it and said, "For the work
you're getting ready to do, I feel like
that's fair." and they accepted it. We
entered into a contract and both parties
agree. I had didn't coersse them into
accepting that contract. I haven't told
them that they had to use me or I'm
going to bust our kneecaps. There was no
part of that that was forceful. Had I
done any of that stuff, it would have
been it would have been what what's the
word? Unethical. That's the word I'm
looking for. That would have been
unethical. But everything we're doing is
above board. We both agreed on what we
were doing. So with that, I say to all
those people that say you're just being
dishonest or you're trying to hide
stuff, that's not true. I'm just trying
to eliminate problems because I've seen
it all before. I know exactly where they
are and all these objections are things
that have come up from my 30 years in
contracting. So, take it for what it's
worth. I hope you got something out of
this. Till next time, I'm Mark with
Successful Contractor and I hope you
have a good dang day and make tons of
money.